Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Willem Frankenhaus. He is
an associate professor of evolutionary psychobiology at the University
of Amsterdam and a senior researcher at the Max
Planck Institute for the Study of Crime Security and
Law. And today we're going to talk about uh
harsh and unpredictable environments and how people develop in
there. So, Doctor Frankenhaus, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for reminding me.
So what characterizes harsh and unpredictable environments? What counts
as such?
Yeah, that's a great place to start. So, um,
as with many concepts in the field, there are
different definitions out there, but the most widely used
one, especially in the human field, um, is to
define harshness as age-specific rates of morbidity and mortality.
So like morbidity could be damage to the body,
for example, and mortality speaks for itself, um. And
then unpredictability is sometimes defined as, you know, stochastic
variation uh through space or time in these age-specific
rates of morbidity and mortality. Now, In the human
field, uh, when people study harsh and unpredictable environments,
they actually often do not directly measure morbidity or
mortality, and so they are not directly measuring. You
know, the concepts that they are working with, but
they are using proxies, so things that tend to
be associated in most populations, uh, with morbidity and
mortality. So for example, um, exposures to violence or
low levels of resources.
Right. Uh, I mean, just before we get into
how people developing these kinds of environments and perhaps
the kinds of a psychological abilities that they develop
their. Is there an expected human childhood, uh, a
typical way that children develop and I mean, if
so, what would it be and what kinds of
implications would it have for how we understand and
study childhood development?
Yeah, that's a great question that really goes to
the core of, of many things, uh, I'm, I'm
working on. And, um, you know, for many fields
in, in, in psychology and maybe even social science
more generally, certainly also anthropology, for example, um. It's
an important question what the types of experiences were
that human children would have experienced over the course
of our species evolution, and of course, you know,
there are some experiences that might have been universal,
but then there will also have been variation across
time and across populations in the types of experiences
children would have had, and Both of these things
matter because they can provide insight into the kinds
of developmental mechanisms that the human species has evolved
that all human children uh come equipped with, uh,
in order to learn about their environment and development
mentally adapt to their environment. And so the term
expected childhood is, is actually a term that uh
in sort of the evolutionary psychology field, uh, is
not often used, but in the clinical psychology literature,
it is often used and there people are interested
in this notion because there is a You know,
a theory in that field, and, and, and I
will also express some skepticism towards that theory in
a moment. There's a theory in that field that
says that when children experience negative events that fall
outside of the species typical range. They are more
likely to develop uh psychopathology. And so, um, an
example that, that's often discussed in this context are
children growing up in, in, in harsh orphanage situations,
OK, where they have very restricted movement and very
regimented care that is not very responsive to their
needs in some of these orphanages, of course, there's
also a lot of variation in, in, in orphanages,
um. And so there I think, you know, most
or all people would agree that that's not the
kind of context in which, uh, you know, the
children would have encountered across human evolution. But then
there are other contexts where um it's really an
empirical question, uh what, you know, whether or not
children would have experienced this type of contexts and,
and so in the clinical field. Um, YOU know,
when children are exposed, for example, to, um, you
know, to, to violence, um, or, or, you know,
uh, harsh parenting. You know, let me just say
upfront, like, of course, that's highly undesirable. It's not
desirable that children are exposed to violence or, or
to harsh parenting, but When they do, to what
extent will children be able to develop kind of
strategies and skills for navigating that difficult context? OK.
And so if you think these types of experiences
are very, you know, would have pretty much rarely
or never occurred over the course of human evolution,
then you might think that children would not have
many tools in their tool kits to be able
to develop strategies and skills for dealing with them.
But if these kinds of contexts would have occurred
over the course of human human evolution, not always,
but you know, often enough to exert selection pressures
on the developmental mechanisms of children, then you would
be able to just, you know, you would expect
such strategies and skills. And if that's the case,
it's interesting to then study what those strategies and
skills might be, how children use them. You know
how these strategies and skills might interfere with with
other contexts that are maybe safe and supportive, you
know, how to leverage these skills in ways that
benefit them, but maybe we can get there later.
But it's important for, for clinical psychology when they
are starting to invoke this notion of the expected
childhood. To not rely on an intuitive notion of
what the expected childhood might have been like, but
to really leverage, you know, many decades of data
collection that other fields in this area have done.
So, so anthropology, primatology, bioarchaeology, um, human history, and
so I see the expected childhood really as a
concept where there is a lot of scope for
interdisciplinary synergy.
Mhm. Yes, we'll certainly get into at least some
of those topics later on in our conversation. Uh,
LET me ask you now, what do we know
about how repeated or chronic childhood adversity shaped social
and cognitive abilities?
Yeah. So over the past decades, um, the, the,
the effects of, of, of, of adversity, by which
I mean prolonged exposure to, to intense stress. So
for example, growing up in a violent household or
neighborhood or, you know, being frequently exposed to low
levels of resources, you know, struggling to make your
ends meet, um. The, the effects of, you know,
of this adversity, um. Uh, HAS been studied mainly
from the perspective of how they create, you know,
struggles for, for, for people, uh, and how these
struggles can lead to, um, You know, lowered functioning
in some domains of life. And, and so decades
of research suggests that people are exposed to adversity,
uh, you know, on average, there will be large
individual differences, but on average, you know, tend to
score lower on certain cognitive tests, including some of
the tests related to school performance and the inference
that people then tend to make from from this
deficit perspective, which I will also, uh, you know,
critique a little bit in a moment. Is that
um exposures to adversity kind of impair brain structure
and function in ways that lower cognitive performance. OK.
And so, so the focus has been on how
adversity impairs. You know, social and cognitive development, um,
and so there are countless articles in many journals,
um, you know, highlighting for a particular population exposed
to a particular adversity performance on a certain kind
of cognitive test is lowered. Now, I think this
body of work is really important. But I also
don't think it's the whole story and so my
goal is not to completely try to um you
know, critique that whole body of work and say,
you know, there's there's nothing in there. I do
think these impairment processes can in some cases operate.
Uh, BUT I think in some cases when people
think they are documenting an impairment, they might actually
not be documenting an impairment, but a strategy that
people use in a harsh and unpredictable environment, so
really it would be an adaptive response rather than
an impairment. And I think there are also cases
where people in harsh and unpredictable environments actually develop
skills, um, that are not documented by some of
the, the tests that are typically used. So, um,
I think it's an empirical question to which extent,
you know, in, in any particular case, impairment processes
are operating and developmental adaptation processes are operating, and
I think the assumption has been too much that
it's only these impairment processes. And so I would
like the field to work towards. A more balanced
view that incorporates also developmental adaptation and then you
know makes differential predictions from both of these processes,
um, uh, to see in which cases people develop
strategies and skills and in which cases really there
would be an impairment.
Mhm. And what specific kinds of social and cognitive
abilities are relevant in the context of uh repeated
or chronic childhood adversity? I mean, I, I think
that in your work, I read about attention, learning,
memory, problem solving, and some other abilities like this.
So, could you tell us about that?
Yeah. So, The way that we approach this, um,
this perspective is to think. To ask the question,
what which type of adversity are particular individuals exposed
to? So for example, exposure to violence is is
quite different than growing up in a loving nonviolent
family context, but with low levels or unpredictable levels
of resources. And so, so I think it's important,
um, to not take what is sometimes called a
cumulative stress approach. So a cumulative stress approach is,
is an approach where you kind of count up
the different stressors that, that, that people have in
their lives and, and then people use these to
predict, uh, outcomes like for example, um, you know,
um, cognitive performance or, or a risk of psychopathology.
So this cumulative approach does, does predict. Some of
these outcomes, but that's not the focus in this
line of work. Here we take what what you
might call dimensional approach, and with this dimensional approach,
you ask for particular types of adversity, what would
be possible strategies and skills that an individual would
need to navigate this particular challenge, and then you
can develop hypotheses about these skills. So to make
it concrete, a specific example. Imagine that a child
is growing up in a world that is, you
know, that is changing very rapidly. So sometimes, you
know, suddenly there is a potential reward in the
environment, but it's also gone quickly or suddenly out
of nowhere, there might be a threat emerging. OK.
And so a child that's in an environment like
this, you could hypothesize, you know, and, and this
is also a thought that, that other researchers have
proposed, so I don't want to take credit for
it, but you might hypothesize that individuals would Um,
you know, would be more vigilant and as a
result, they might be good at picking up changes
in their environment or rapidly updating their information state
because they're in a world that's changing quickly, whereas
if you're in a world where, you know, maybe
you come home and your parents say, oh, you
know, why don't you go do your homework? Um,
IN your bedroom, it's stable, quiet, you know, and
then 2 hours from now when you come, come
down, uh, from your bedroom, there will be, there
will be dinner. Dinner will be ready, right? So
now this child can really focus with sustained attention
on this. You know, learning this, this, this, this
homework, whereas another child is in a much more
dynamic context where many things are happening, including threats
but also opportunities, um, and, and that child would
be potentially shifting their attention more, updating their working
memory faster. And so you might imagine that, uh,
children in those contexts would develop enhanced attention shifting
or enhanced working memory updating. Maybe particularly if they
were in that type of context. OK. So in
some cases, it's not just the developmental exposures that
matter, but also what is the context within which
we test people's abilities.
Mhm. And are there unique strengths and uh abilities
that develop in response to high stress environments? And
if so, what would these strengths and abilities be?
Yeah. So, I like to distinguish between, you know,
strategies and, and so those I see as decision
making and behavior that is tailored to the demands
of adverse environments and hidden talents and those I
consider enhanced cognitive abilities, you know, enhanced in order
to solve the challenge in an adverse environment. And
I think there, you know, there is good evidence
for adaptive strategies in harsh and unpredictable environments. Um,
THERE'S, you know, there's a body of research that
has grown over the past decades in this area.
There is mathematical theory, um, that is used to
also make predictions in some cases. Um, THE hidden
talents approach is much more recent. It's, it's an
approach that, uh, is about 10 years old, you
know, fewer researchers have worked on it. And so
I think the evidence for, for hidden talents for
these enhanced cognitive abilities is more limited. I do
think there are interesting leads in the literature and
interesting findings, and some findings have been replicated, but
in other cases, the evidence is more mixed. So
some studies do find it, others don't, or, um,
you know, there's. One study that has found it,
but we don't know the extent to which the
result replicates or generalizes. So I would say that
yes, there is evidence for strategies and there's some
evidence for hidden talents, but that approach, um, you
know, needs to be fleshed out more.
Uh, SINCE you've already mentioned hidden talents, could you
explain what these hidden talents are?
Yeah, so hidden talents are cognitive abilities or cognitive
processes, um, that, you know, that through a process
of developmental adaptation have become strengthened or enhanced. You
know, in people who are exposed to a particular
form of adversity. So a concrete example that I
think makes it very clear, and this is actually
a study that's been done already a few decades
ago, um, before kind of people, you know, were,
were, were looking at these things from a hidden
talents perspective, um, children who, you know, who grow
up in, in, in, in very abusive households. Uh,
THEY, you know, in this particular study, they, when
they were shown faces that were partially degraded, so
imagine like a photo of an angry face or
a happy face, and then there's like pixels overlaying
on the picture. So it's kind of hard to
see what's exactly the emotional expression. So children who
were physically abused relative to a non-abused control group.
Um, THEY, they were more accurate at reading, uh,
the angry face. This is a study that was
led by Seth Pollock in 2002. And, and so
why is this really interesting? It's very interesting because
it's showing that these children from, from these abusive
backgrounds who, who would on average typically in most
studies perform lower on on certain cognitive tests, they
actually performed higher on this cognitive test, specifically on
in recognizing uh an angry emotional expression. And so
that, that you could characterize as an enhancement in
their ability to detect information in the environment. Now,
I will say that not all studies find this,
uh, there are, there's another finding in the literature
which is actually more common, um, and that's when
people find what's called a hostile attribution bias. So
when there's kind of imperfect information. Like ambiguous information
like a degraded face, um, you know, people who
have had many negative experiences, for example, to violence,
they might just be more likely to give a
negative experience, but they would do that not only
when the face is actually expressing anger, in which
case they're accurately inferring it, but also if the
face would be, for example, happy. Right. And so
if you're, if you're interpreting an ambiguous but actually
happy face as angry, that's not being more accurate.
That's, that's sort of over attributing anger to to
the face. Uh, AND so there's on the one
hand enhanced accuracy in some cases, and that I
would consider consistent with with hidden talents, but if
there is, um, you know, basically bias towards a
hostile attribution, that that would not be considered a
hidden talent.
So when it comes to enhanced emotion detection in
unpredictable environments and particularly when it, when it is
associated with danger, I mean, is there uh enhanced
emotion detection in those kinds of environments? And if
so, which kinds of emotions, uh, would, uh, I
mean, what are the kinds of emotions whose detection
would be enhanced?
Yeah. So the finding I just described from 20
years ago that was focused on, on, on, on
threat, um, and children who had been abused, but
there is actually a body of research and this
body, I think, you know, I have, you know,
I have substantial trust in because there are quite
a large number of studies, there is quite a
large number of studies. Um, MANY of, of whom,
uh, or at least several of whom have adopted
kind of gold standard open science practices like pre-registration
or have used a registered report format, and, and
that work is on empathic accuracy. And, um, and
so it's inferring people's kind of internal emotional states.
And um, but that work is not focusing on
people who have been abused, but it's focusing on
people who come from uh uh less favorable socioeconomic
backgrounds. OK, so that's, that's a different group, um.
But one of the thoughts, there are several theories
about, about why, why this pattern occurs, but in,
in, I would say about 2/3 of the studies
that have been done in, in, in this context,
people who come from less favorable socioeconomic backgrounds score
higher on empathic accuracy, OK? And this is true
both when they are shown static pictures uh of
emotion of very subtle emotional expression, so, um. So
you'll see a picture of uh of just the
the eyes of an individual and then they are
either looking angry, suspicious, sad, or, you know, wary
or something, and those are sort of subtle differences,
um, but, but people from less favorable socioeconomic backgrounds
are more likely to um to judge these more
accurately in most studies. And um there's also work
on this with uh dynamic stimuli. So there you
don't see just a, you know, a slice of
a face, but you actually see a person kind
of talking and expressing emotion. And so, You know,
it's, it's not known exactly why this. Pattern occurs
there there could be different reasons for this. Um,
IT could be for example that um people in
in in less favorable socioeconomic conditions are more dependent
on each other, right? So if you have all
the resources in the world, um. In a way,
you're less dependent on other people because, you know,
with the resources that you have, you can always
You know, for example, if you need a ride
to the airport, you can, you can, you can
buy a taxi, you know, or if your fridge
breaks down, you can ask somebody else, uh, or
you can just buy a new fridge. But if
you're more interdependent, if you have fewer resources, you
might just need You know, you need each other
more sometimes and so um and so then being
attuned to other people's internal states could be um
you know a a a favorite response and so
through phenotypic plasticity through developmental adjustments, it's possible that
that people uh from from kind of less favorable
socioeconomic backgrounds become more empathically accurate. What's I think
not really known in in this particular literature is
to what extent is this shaped by sort of
developmental experiences versus an individual's current state. OK, so
if you take someone who came from sort of
well resourced early environments, but now they're currently experiencing
low resources, to what extent does that shift their
ability versus is it more like a gradually developed
trait over the course of development. But it is
one of the examples where the empirical evidence, I
think is, is, uh, you know, relatively convincing. Mhm.
And when and how do people living in high
stress environments develop strengths or become more psychologically vulnerable?
I mean, when is it, when and how is
it that one or the other happens?
Yeah, well, that's a, that's a, you know, that's
a um. You know, that's a, that's a big
and a challenging question. It's a, it's a very
important question and um in terms of kind of
vulnerability, for example, the psychopathology, I will, I will
not say too much about that because uh my
expertise in that area is, is more limited. But
I would say that um if you zoom out,
you know, the more severely intense the stressful experiences
are, the more distressing they are, the more prolonged
these experiences are through time. Is it a week?
Is it, you know, your whole life? And um
the more domains of your life in which you
are experiencing these different stressors, the more, you know,
likely people are to develop, um. You know, Psychological
vulnerabilities. Now, it's also true that actually sometimes people
talk about this in a little bit of a
deterministic way, but actually, you know, in, in quite
stressful environments. Many people and, and, and you know,
often the majority of people do not actually develop
these vulnerabilities uh but it is true that people
in such environments are on average more likely to
develop such vulnerabilities. Now there are also factors that
um that are sometimes called protective factors in the
literature on resilience, um. And those protective factors are
things that make it sort of less likely that
somebody will develop these vulnerabilities despite being in these
challenging circumstances. And, and one example of a protective
factor for children is, um, you know, the presence
of caring adults slash role models in their environment.
So, um, you know, imagine that there's a child
and it's growing up in a family, um. You
know, that's, that's really struggling, um. And maybe the
parents, you know, are, are struggling to, you know,
to, to find the time to really Help their
children with the challenges that they're facing, uh, whether
it be, you know, going to school safely or,
uh, you know, getting their homework solved. Um, IMAGINE
that there would then be an uncle or a
neighbor that's, you know, very supportive of this child,
that, that really makes it more likely that this
child is going to, um, not have these kinds
of vulnerabilities play a role. But you know, even
people who do develop potentially these vulnerabilities, it could
still be the case that they also have strengths
that are unrecognized by perspectives that only focus on
um on sort of deficits and vulnerabilities. So, um,
I, I think of these things as in some
cases being mutually compatible.
Mhm. Uh, ARE there environments where impulsive behavior is
adaptive?
Right. So, um, you know, just like the expected
childhood, uh, but even more so with impulsivity, there
are different definitions of this, uh, concept in the
field, and so that matters because, um, you know,
Impulsivity defined one way might be adaptive in context
A, whereas impulsivity defined another way might be adaptive
in context B, um, or there are actually some
definitions of impulsivity, which, which a priori define it
as a maladaptive behavior. So then you then it's
never possible to say that it's adaptive, you know,
um, but I, I think so, so. Um, IT'S
possible to distinguish between information impulsivity and temporal impulsivity.
And so information impulsivity is about how much information
do I want to gather before making a decision.
And so, um, And so if I, you know,
if I, um, if I'm really thinking through the
consequences of my actions and gathering information on, you
know, the possible outcomes, then I'm not very information
impulsive, whereas, you know, if I very quickly make
a decision without thinking through or without gathering information
about the possible outcomes, that's, that's, you know, that's
impulsive. So think about like somebody who immediately, they
see a nice house, they just buy it right
away if they, if they can, but then suddenly
they realize that there are consequences. And temporal impulsivity
is more about the extent to which you prefer
so so all or most people prefer sooner or
later outcomes, um, but, but there's a lot of
individual variation in, in, in how strong this preference
for immediate outcomes is and so temporal impulsivity is
uh focused on, um, you know, how much do
people prefer the immediate outcome and so let's focus
on. When would temporal impulsivity be adaptive, so Maybe
you are familiar with the, the marshmallow test. Is
that something you've heard about so children are offered,
you know, one marshmallow now or 2 marshmallows later,
maybe after 10 or 15 minutes. And um, And
so some children eat the the marshmallow instantaneously and
then there are other children and, and they wait
and there are nice videos of this online if
you think this sounds fun, you can, you know,
Google it and, and you'll find uh also children
who, for example, open up the marshmallow and take
some of the inside and eat it and then
close it back and put it, you know, back
waiting for the researcher to come back so they
get the second marshmallow. But they have at least
also had some immediate rewards. Anyway, um, So, so
when children grow up in a world where future
rewards are much more uncertain than immediate rewards, maybe
because their environment is changing quickly or because they
have little control over their environment or over or
about where they are in their environment, maybe, you
know, they, they just kind of moved around and
they don't know whether they're going to be around.
Um, TO, to cash in on the later reward,
maybe other people are either unwilling or unable to,
um, you know, to, to, to give them the
future rewards and so children who grow up in
such environments are more likely. To take the first
marshmallow instead of wait for the later marshmallows. And
in the literature, um, this was often characterized as
a sort of a failure to delay gratification or
short-sightedness or an impairment in their inhibition, you know,
their ability to kind of inhibit their immediate urge
to, to grab this first marshmallow. But, um, other
researchers, including, for example, Martin, you know, Martin Daly
and, and, and, and others, they argued that In
a world where future rewards are unlikely to materialize,
it might actually be, you know, adaptive for an
organism to um take the much more certain immediate
rewards. And so if you ask me, you know,
what are the conditions in which impulsivity, uh, might
be adaptive, um, you know, uh, those conditions, you
know, it matters in part based on how likely
the future reward is and there's also mathematical modeling
that has. You know, analyzed, uh, this problem and
and that supports also uh. Yeah, this hypothesis. And
so, It matters because this is a case, remember
at the beginning um I mentioned that there are
some cases where people characterize something as an impairment,
but actually, you know, it's possible to view it
or to reframe it as a as a as
an adaptive strategy. So if it's true that a
child is growing up in a world where future
rewards are unlikely to materialize and it's showing. You
know, a a stronger preference for these immediate rewards
rather than saying, oh this child has a deficit,
it might be more accurate to say this child
is responding adaptively in just the same way that
any other or most other individuals would had they
grown up in this context. And what's really striking,
and there's some very interesting work on this, um,
among others by Celeste Kids and Yuko Munakata and
Laura Michaelson, where they have shown that the extent
to which children wait for this second marshmallow, um,
it depends also on the extent to which they
trust. The extent to which, for example, an adult
is, is going to give that that that that
later reward. OK. So, um, in, in one set
of studies, uh, what's been manipulated is, um, whether
the child, you know, in a previous interaction, the,
the adult actually lived up to their promise towards
the child, and if they didn't, the child thinks,
oh, this adult is maybe not so reliable, you
know, I'm, I'm actually not going to wait for
the second marshmallow, so children who do development mentally
come from On average, you know, relatively reliable environments,
um, they kind of quickly adjust their behavioral strategy,
um, when the experimenter might not be reliable towards
them. And in another set of studies, the adult
was behaving unreliably towards another adult rather than to
the child itself. But then the child, you know,
noticed this and, and was like, OK, well in
that case, I'm, I'm less likely to wait for
my future rewards. Yeah.
Right. So, uh, I think this is sort of
related to the previous question. In what kinds of
contexts do people develop a present oriented psychology?
Yeah, yeah, I agree that is um that is
related because so a present oriented psychology, um, we
could characterize as a as a psychology that's prioritizing.
The present over the future in general and so
that includes potentially like immediate rewards over future rewards
but also it might for example you know um
be the case that the organism is, is very
attuned to threats that that might be currently present
so that you're also focused on the present, uh,
on rapidly updating information now and maybe you know,
using cognition to do that maybe more than sort
of focusing, you know, storing things. Into long term
memory, which is a more future oriented thing in
some in some sense. Um, AND, and so, You
know, It's a complicated question, but you know, from
a bird's eye view, I, I'd say in environments
that are um. You know, that, that are changing
rapidly. Um, ONE of the tricky bits is that
change can take different forms, so environments might change.
In a way where you know the current state
of the world does predict next states of the
world. So for example, if today's weather predicts tomorrow's
weather, um, we would say that the state of
the world is auto correlated. There is a correlation
from today with tomorrow, um, but change might also
be what people might call stochastic, um, and so
then, uh, you know, tomorrow is is is is
is not so predictable, uh, from today. Of course
this is a continuum. Uh, uh, HAD the extent
to which there is auto correlation and it can
differ for different dimensions of the environment, so it
could be that, for example, um, you know, threat
is, is, is, is relatively highly auto correlated, but
resources are not or vice versa. And so in
general, and this is really one of the, I
almost want to say sort of a soapbox that
I like to get on, um, when we're studying.
Developmental adaptations to, you know, childhood environments or or
environments in general, it's really, really crucial to characterize
the environment in a very precise and fine-grained way.
And so, This is one of the things that
I really like about Like ecologists and evolutionary biologists,
but also, you know, vision scientists, for example, in,
in, in human cognition, um, is that they're interested
in the adaptive fit between organisms and their environment.
And they really try to characterize the environment in
a lot of detail. And so that means, for
example, not just saying, oh, there, there are high
or low levels of threats, but also how does
threat change through space and time. And you know,
is it different for neighborhoodhood threat versus, you know,
family threat? And um, You know, when you characterize
the environment much more precisely, you can also develop
more precise hypotheses about what would be the kind
of cognitive strategy or behavioral strategy or skill that
would benefit the individual, um, in that context. Yeah.
Mhm.
Why is there a high prevalence of violence in
deprived communities?
Yeah. Well, I, I would first say that it's
um. It's It's true in Some countries that in
deprived communities, uh, there are higher rates of violence
than there are in more affluent communities, but there
are also um communities where uh resources are low,
where violence is not necessarily more prevalent. Um, AND,
and so, um, you know, when we think through
these questions, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, uh, yeah,
it's important to, to acknowledge that variation, I think.
But it is true that in in in in
some industrialized countries, uh this, this, this is the
case and um the reasons for this are really
multifactorial, like there are many reasons for this. Um,
AND, and sometimes those reasons are hard to tease
apart, but I will focus maybe on one reason.
In deprived, in resource deprived communities, there are many,
there are relatively many people who are struggling to
make ends meet. OK, and so for example, they,
they might not be able to, you know, to,
to feed their children that evening or or buy
clothes that they need for their children or they
cannot pay rent and so they risk being evicted
from their house, which has major downstream consequences. If
you're evicted from your house, it might be much
harder to sustain your job. If you don't sustain
your job, your income, you know, falls out and
you know, maybe you end up in a homeless
situation with a lot of threats living on the
street. So people are in sort of, uh, you
know, in a really difficult situation. And when people
are and sometimes be, you know, a concept that
that Daniel Nettle and Benoit Cupon, for example, use
for this is is something like a desperation threshold
below which people are not able to meet their
basic needs. When you are below this threshold, it
might. You know, it it might be. A reasonable
response for an individual to try to engage in
a high risk behavior and by a high risk
behavior I mean a behavior that could lead them
to actually have a very favorable outcome above this
desperation threshold, even if it's also possible that it
actually leads them to be in a worse position.
OK, so for example, if I choose a safe
option like a low wage job, um, but that's
not going to help me actually pay the rent
anymore, and I will get evicted and I will
run into all these problems, that low wage job
is not such an attractive option. If there's another
option which might involve violence like robbery. Um, YOU
know, that's a much more high risk option. Something
really bad could happen for me, but it could
also be the case that now I do have
these resources that I need to, you know, to,
to, you know, pay rent, or in some cases,
you know, if people, um, struggle with drug addiction,
it might help them satisfy this sort of for
them basic need of of of procuring um the
drugs. Now let me just highlight that the vast
majority of people in deprived communities do not engage
in violence. But a subset of them, um, you
know, might use that as a strategy to obtain,
you know, resources that they need in order to,
um, Get above the desperation threshold. Now what's what's
interesting about this desperation threshold idea um is that
it also predicts, so it doesn't just predict that
below the threshold maybe, you know, in some cases
risk taking is favored, including violence could be viewed
as a form of risk taking in some cases,
but when you're above the thresholds you actually wanna
not take very many risks. You don't want variance
in your outcomes because variance in your outcome. Could
also mean you fall below the threshold. So then
what this idea predicts is that when you're above
the threshold, you actually are more risk averse. And
so it predicts a discontinuity where if an individual
feels like they're below the desperation threshold, then it,
it increases the chances that they will take more
risk and and. More risk can be taken in
different ways. You can also buy lottery tickets, which
is nonviolent, but for some people it might mean
using violence to try to obtain resources. Mhm.
So earlier when we talked about hidden talents, this
is something that you touched on a little bit.
What is resilience and how do people develop it?
Yeah. So it's interesting and actually um my, my,
my uh colleague and collaborator Bruce Ellis, um, I
think he phrased this well in a paper, uh
we, we wrote together, um, because this is a
question that's, that's commonly asked when people are interested
in hidden talents, they say, oh, is this, is
this the resilience approach basically, um, and the resilience
approach, you know, it has been around for a
few decades, uh, uh, a leading researcher in this
area has been, for example, Anne Masten. And um
she's written a book, Ordinary Magic, which is explaining
uh the approach and The way that Bruce Ellis
characterized it, um, is, is as follows. So the,
in the resilience literature, people ask, you know, Despite
exposures to adversity, Some individuals do achieve kind of
favorable outcomes like having, you know, a stable income,
having stable social relationships, not struggling with mental health
or addictions or not, you know, and so they
have particular outcomes despite the adversity they experienced. They
beat the odds, you know, um. Whereas the hidden
talents approach says not despite but because of adversity,
because of the exposures to certain kinds of adversity,
people might develop skills that help them navigate this
difficult challenge. So if you have low resources, for
example, and you're more dependent on other. On their
individuals maybe you develop enhancements in empathic accuracy. Now
this idea is also not specific to the hidden
talents approach. There are um researchers in kind of
social and cognitive psychology that have that have developed
these ideas as well, but it does fit with,
with the hidden talents approach. And so here it's
not despite of, but because of adversity an individual
has developed uh a particular outcome. There's another important
related. Difference, and that is that the resilience approach
tends to focus on um on outcomes that are
socially kind of valued, that are considered socially desirable
within society, within a particular society. But that's not
necessarily true for the hidden talents approach. So for
example, if it's the case that I grow up
in a social environment where status, you know, is
attained or resources are obtained through coercion in part,
OK, and so maybe through, you know, um, intimidating
other people, intimidating other people or making sure that
they don't mess with me. OK. The ability to,
um, you know, to get people to think that
they should not mess with me in that environment,
the ability to maybe intimidate other people in that
context is a strategy that is benefiting potentially that
individual. But it's not something that people, you know,
that would be generally considered socially desirable. But if,
if people in that context, in some cases develop
enhancements in this ability. Um, YOU know, that, that
would be considered a hidden talent. So I, I
would say that the hidden talents approach does not
necessarily focus on outcomes that are beneficial for society.
Uh, IT might in some, in some cases people
might, you know, when you, when you have a
skill, it can be used for good or for
bad in the sense of in a societal sense.
So if I'm better at, you know, let's say
reading other people, I could use it to help
other people, but I could also use it to
exploit other people, right? And so. The skill here
is what the focus is of the hidden talents
approach and then whether it's used in a socially
desirable way or socially undesirable way is less important
to the hidden talents approach. Um, ALTHOUGH in this
approach too, we're very interested in, you know, when
we characterize people's skills. How can we help them
leverage these skills in ways that benefit them and
that benefit also society?
Mhm. So taking into account what we've been talking
about in terms of how humans develop in different
kinds of contexts, are there, are there high degrees
of phenotypic plasticity in humans, particularly when it comes
to being able to tailor development to different conditions?
Right, So, So, so phenotypic plasticity, the ability of
organisms to um adjust their phenotypes, uh, in response
to environmental conditions or another definition that sometimes used
as sort of the capacity of a genotype to
produce, to express or produce different phenotypes depending on
environmental conditions is widespread in nature. And so, you
know, most or all species exhibit phenotypic plasticity in
some traits. OK, so an example of a phenotypically
plastic trait would be the stress response system if
you grow up in a world that is safe
and supportive and stable and you have a lot
of control over outcomes, your stress response system is
going to on average develop differently than if you
grow up in the world. You know, where there's
threats, there's unpredictability, you have little control over outcomes,
and so there's plasticity in the stress response system.
It's shaped through developmental processes in a particular way,
on average. Now there are also traits where we
don't exhibit phenotypic plasticity. So for example, the number
of eyes in humans is not phenotypically plastic. If
we grow up in a world that's where there's
relatively low amounts of sunlight, it's not the case
that we, you know, that we develop a third
eye, for example, right? And so it's always important
when asking about phenotypic plasticity to sort of say.
OK, in which traits are we considering phenotypic plasticity?
And then to sort of say, and, and, you
know, what are the types of inputs to which
this trait can respond. OK. And um and so
I, you know, humans are certainly uh uh in
in in many traits, um. Uh, A highly phenotypically
plastic species. Uh, SO, so some, some, some animals,
um, they, they can learn about some very specific
thing. Um, BUT they, you know, they cannot, you
know, they can learn that a particular input is
associated with a particular output. Uh, IT'S acquired through
experiences, but, but they can learn the breadth of
information that humans can learn, right? And so, so
humans can learn a very broad range of information.
Now it's not the case that Animal learning always
is of course just simple stimulus response like animals
can also in some cases learn uh very complex
uh and quite broad things but but humans um
are unusual in the extent I think to which
we, um, which we can do this and you
know that's, that's not so it's interesting because sometimes.
That's characterized it so, you know, we, they have
sort of the other non-human animals have specific learning
mechanisms and humans have, you know, general learning mechanisms.
I don't really love this terminology, um. Because you
know, the various ways that humans can learn also
require many different mechanisms, I think, and this is
not just something that I'm, you know, that I'm
saying it's also, uh, you know, a point of
view that's quite common in evolutionary psychology that humans
don't have less but actually have more, um, learning
mechanisms. So for example, humans can learn through teaching,
right? So, um, uh, somebody who, who, who already
knows uh how to solve a problem or make
something. They might modify their behavior in a way
that makes learning for other individuals, naive individuals, easier.
OK, now there's discussions about how much teaching occurs
in different cultures and so on, but it's clear
that humans can learn through teaching and um many
other non-human animals do not learn through teaching, but
teaching then gives us an additional mechanism through which
we can acquire information, right? And so, um. I
am not an expert in culture, but what I
gleaned from the literature is that Most researchers think
that cumulative culture where, you know, we transmit cultural
skills, uh, cultural knowledge, um, and then develop innovations
on this knowledge and then transmit the revised cultural
knowledge and in that sense, we can, you know,
incrementally increase the complexity of the tools we build
or of the languages we use or of any
kind of thing that helps us adapt to our
environments that cumulative culture is, you know. Either unique
to humans or almost unique to humans. And you
know, to my understanding in this literature, the consensus
is also that it's cumulative culture that has enabled
humans to inhabit such extremely diverse ecologies. Right. So
we live in freezing cold, you know, very hot,
uh, and, and, you know, um, with many forests
or, you know, with very barren landscapes. So we
live in cities, you know, we can live in
all these types of environments, um. Yeah, because we,
we, we are highly phenotypically plastic. We can adjust
to a very wide range of conditions. Yeah. Mhm.
So, one last question or topic here. Uh, WHEN
it comes to development, I've seen and also through
some of the interviews I've done myself, that we
can observe the use of life history theory both
in psychology and in evolutionary biology. But are psychologists
and biologists using the term in the same way
and are the research programs similar or not?
Yeah. So there are similarities and differences and, and
so let me just highlight a couple of similarities.
So there are similarities in some of the key
concepts. So for example, the notion of trade-offs. Have,
um, is, is, is central to, to both fields,
and so, um, uh, you know, there are different
types of trade-offs like resource trade-offs and functional trade-offs,
but let me just, uh, for now, say, you
know, the idea that um If you, you know,
use your resources to grow a larger body, for
example, you do not have those resources available for
maybe, you know, producing, um, offspring quickly, uh, you
know that those kinds of trade-offs are central to
to both um literatures. Another thing that's central to
both literatures is a focus on life history traits.
And so those are the traits that kind of
define the life cycle of an organism. So, you
know, the, the age at which it matures, the
number of offspring it produces, the investments it makes
in offspring, and, and, and so those types of
traits are also central to to both approaches. So
there is some common core, but They are sort
of partially overlapping Venn diagrams, and now I'll mention
some of the differences where the Venn diagrams are
not overlapping. Well, so in the In the human
literature, um. You know, it's, it's quite common to
for researchers to include what you might call kind
of more psychological traits um into what people think
are life history strategies. So they will, for example,
argue that people who mature fast and you know,
start reproducing at a young age. Um, THAT that's
part of a life history strategy, sort of a
suite of correlated responses to a particular environment, and
that suite of responses also includes maybe risk taking
and impulsivity to mention two of the traits that
you asked about earlier. Um, THAT'S not the way
it's typically talked about in the evolutionary biology literature.
OK, so this broader range of traits that's included
in the human literature, um, that's one difference and
I think. One of the challenges of this, it's,
you know, is is that. The, and this is
another difference is that the theory in evolutionary biology,
um, on which life history that framework is based
is um is often mathematically formalized. So people have
expressed, you know, in, in equations exactly what the
variables are, how they are thought to relate to
each other, computed under different scenarios, what natural selection,
you know, would favor. Um, AND people have done
this for these life history traits. OK. Now in
the human literature. Almost no one is doing this
mathematical modeling. There are some exceptions, but it's very
rare, um, this mathematical modeling in humans and also
the extent to which people draw on the mathematical
modeling in the evolutionary biology literature is very limited
in most cases. But then people do make claims
about it would be adaptive for that, you know,
natural selection would favor in these types of scenarios,
uh, not just, you know, earlier reproduction, for example,
but also higher risk taking and more impulsivity, but
that claim is then not based on mathematical theory.
And so an evolutionary biologist would question that. They
would say, you know, it could be empirically true
that these things hang together in some or all
human populations and if that's the case, that's interesting
and that requires an explanation and maybe it requires
an evolutionary explanation, maybe another type of explanation, but
it's not a prediction from life history theory in
so far as we view life history theory as
a formalized body of theory in the way that
we're using it in evolutionary biology. Um, AND so,
uh, yeah, as a researcher, also, on the one
hand, I'm really enthusiastic about social scientists, including psychologists,
you know, building these bridges with, with life history,
uh, theory. There's also uh uh sophisticated literature and
anthropology that's that's doing this which I really appreciate.
But I also think it's really important that the
the kind of social scientists keep a close eye
on uh the the formalized theory that's being developed
in evolutionary biology and that um that we are
very explicit about when are we. Predicting something based
on a mathematical model or which mathematical model or
under which scenarios versus, you know, here we observe
an empirical pattern that we think potentially, you know,
could be viewed in light of life history, um,
in terms of life history theory. I'd like to
say one more thing about that, if that's OK.
I think in evolutionary biology, people see life history
theory. More as a framework. And so what is
the difference between a theory and the framework? Um,
THIS is a whole discussion in itself. But you
know, you could say that, you know, a theory
allows for, if especially if it's formalized, it allows
for deducing predictions. Whereas a framework is more um
a description of what are the important concepts and
which things are, you know, related to each other.
But how those relationships pan out, that could depend
on the context. And so for example, um, whereas
a psychologist, it's common in the human literature that
people will write something like in a harsh and
unpredictable environment, faster life history strategies are favored and
so you know, people reproduce at a younger age
and so on and so on. But actually the
mathematical modeling shows that that actually depends, for example,
at which ages this harshness causes the most mortality.
Is that early in childhood or is it more
in adulthood? It depends on whether the population is
currently, you know, growing or is currently, uh, sort
of carrying capacity in the ecology. And, and so,
so in biology, you would not usually read some
general statement like this. They would say, you know,
under these and these and these conditions, mathematical modeling
suggests that it would be adaptive to have such
and such life history strategy. And so it's possible
to build within the life history framework. Specific theories
that address particular scenarios, but it's not viewed as
a theory that makes all these predictions in the
way that the human field does. So I like
that this bridge is being forged. I think it's
great that there are these bridges between the social
and biological sciences, but I do think there is,
um, you know, uh, it's important for us to
try to build these bridges as, as best we
can.
Mhm Great. So just before we go, Doctor Frankenhaus,
uh, would you like to tell people where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, so, um, you can, you can find my
work, uh, you know, by, by typing it there
are two websites where you can, can learn more
about, uh, about my work. One is my, my
personal web page and so, uh, you could look
at Will Franken has, uh, and, and then you'll,
you'll find it online. Um, We talked earlier about
adversity and about, um, you know, trying to develop
an approach that is not just focusing on sort
of the the the struggles and potential impairments but
also on strength and strategies and sort of a
more well rounded view and I'm of course not
the only researcher who is interested in developing such
an approach. um THERE are in fact. Uh, THERE'S
really a growing number of researchers across different fields
of psychology, but also beyond psychology interested in doing
this. And so, um, with these researchers, we started,
uh, uh, uh, a network and the network is
focused on science communication. OK, because we think that
the way that people growing up in conditions of
adversity, the way they are represented in the scientific
literature, but also in the media, um, is sometimes
not doing justice to the full picture. And so,
um. You know, there's a, a, a network now
which is about communicating and expanding research on adversity.
It's the CERA network CERA. And so if you're
interested in in reading about sort of the science
communication aspect of how people grow up in adverse
environments and how we can try to do a
good job of of representing them, um, um. You
know, in, in a way that does justice to
the, to the complexity of their lives and the
nuances in their strategies and, and abilities, uh, looking
up this, this, this network website might be interesting,
and there are also some products that we're developing
with this network focused on this particular topic. Mhm.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much. I appreciated it as well
and um yeah, I uh I look forward to
our future interactions.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelisky, Scott Zacharyishtim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diota Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.